---
title: Which functions blog must have?
description: I'm planning to improve starter 11ty theme for my needs. First of all I think I will need to add some functionality, optimize it a bit and change some markup and styles to do better semantic.
date: 2021-08-24
tags:
  - blog
layout: layouts/post.njk
---
I'm planning to improve starter 11ty theme for my needs. First of all I think I will need to add some functionality, optimize it a bit and change some markup and styles to do better semantic.

I think I will create some posts about my improvements and maybe I will create my own starter (I'm not sure about it, but will see).

First of all I think I need to create list of blog functionality that I think should be provided in minimum starter package.

### Custom pages

I need to have possibility to create static pages with some custom content. Preferably it will be text content from the markdown files, but I need to think about adding custom pages. Looks like it isn't a big deal to do it with the 11ty. Also starter theme include such functionality.

### List of the blog posts

Yeah, for the blog it is very important function (hello Captain Oblivious). I think it should have list of posts with:

- title
- date of publication
- short description
- tags list
- optional image
- optional author (need to think about multiple authors for the starter)

Also list should have pagination for sure. Right now it isn't important for me (because I have to small amount of posts), but it will be useful in the future and for the starter theme.

### Blog post

This is the heart of the blog, so we need to have a lot of things here, they are:

- title
- date of publication
- content
- tags list
- SEO data for the post
- previous and next post links
- optional main image
- optional gallery (I didn't see galleries in the posts from the markdown files, but I want try to find good solution for adding galleries into the posts)
- optional author
- optional comments (comments from GitHub or another comments service)

### Image optimization

Images should be optimized and use lazy loading. Looks like 11ty has some plugin for doing it, I will try to use it and get the best possible results for images optimization. I believe it will be interesting topic to think and discuss.

### Microdata

I wanted to put this point into the "Blog post" section, but now you can see it separate. The reason is that not only blog post pages should have microdata. I believe that all pages should contain it.

### Configurable header and footer

It should be useful for starter theme to have possibility to add fast some links for social media and to manage header links. I can't say for now how will it be in the final result, but I'm sure that it is nice option to have.

### RSS feeds

I'm not using it since Google killed it, but I see that it is important option for a lot of people. I think it should be added at least for posts.

### Sitemap

Autogenerated sitemap will be pretty cool to have and search engines will say "thanks" for it.

### Other things

I will think about adding few color themes and add possibility to configure it. Also will need to think about adding Google Analytics and some other things.

## Conclusion

This is a list of functionality that every blog should have at the beginning. Maybe I missed something and list will be updated, but for now it looks like complete list of the minimum functionality that every blog must have and I want to see it at every starter for the blogs.